## v0.136.0

### 🛑 Breaking changes 🛑

- `countconnector`: Upgrade profiles proto to 1.8.0 (#42526)
- `datadogexporter`: Deprecate zorkian codepath (#17373)
  Feature gate exporter.datadogexporter.metricexportnativeclient is now deprecated; the default metrics exporter is now 
  Metrics Export Serializer unless feature gate exporter.datadogexporter.metricexportserializerclient is disabled. 
  See https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/releases/tag/v0.122.0 and #37930 for more 
  info about Metrics Export Serializer. 
  
- `elasticsearchexporter`: Upgrade profiles proto to 1.8.0 (#42526)
- `internal/kafka`: Disable Kafka client metrics (#42662)
  We disable publishing Kafka client metrics to brokers, since they were not
  added intentionally and may lead to log spam when the broker does not really
  support metrics. We may make this configurable in the future.
  
- `golden`: Upgrade profiles proto to 1.8.0 (#42526)
- `pkg/ottl`: Upgrade profiles proto to 1.8.0 (#42526)
  See proto changelog. https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-proto/blob/main/CHANGELOG.md#180---2025-09-02
- `signaltometricsconnector`: Upgrade profiles proto to 1.8.0 (#42526)
- `transformprocessor`: Upgrade profiles proto to 1.8.0 (#42526)

### 💡 Enhancements 💡

- `azureblobexporter`: Added template_enabled option to azureblobexporter blob_name_format to enable or disable template rendering. (#42643)
- `prometheusremotewritereceiver`: Adds support to accept METRIC_TYPE_UNSPECIFIED as gauge type (#41840)
- `isolationforestprocessor`: Add comprehensive unit tests with 93% coverage (#42693)
- `exporter/awss3`: Add S3PartitionTimezone config value to be able to change the timezone used for time-based partitioning (#42319)
- `clickhouseexporter`: Add TLS configuration for cert based authentication. (#22805)
- `telemetrygen`: Updates the semconv to use 1.37.0 (#42567)
- `coralogixexporter`: Enable rate limiter mechanism in the Coralogix exporter. To disable it set `rate_limiter.enabled` to `false`. (#42552)
- `failoverconnector`: Adds queue_settings to failoverconnector to enable queueing on the "exporter portion" of the connector. (#33077)
- `farotranslator, faroreceiver`: Do not use faro event timestamp as the log record timestamp (#42600)
  Faro events originate in the user's browser, where the local clock may differ from actual time. | As a result, log record timestamps can be inaccurate, leading to ingestion issues (e.g., timestamps too old or too far in the future).
- `processor/k8sattributesprocessor`: Add support for k8s.cronjob.uid attribute in k8sattributesprocessor (#42557)
- `awslogsencodingextension`: Add instrumentation scope attributes to aws logs (#42788)
- `opampsupervisor`: Add support for client initiated OpAMP heartbeats in the supervisor. (#42533)
- `internal/tools`: Add support for modernize in Makefile (#42542)
- `processor/resourcedetection`: Add support for linode cloud in resourcedetectionprocessor (#42543)
- `processor/resourcedetectionprocessor`: Add support for Scaleway host image attributes in the resourcedetectionprocessor (#42682)
- `processor/resourcedetectionprocessor`: Add support for Vultr cloud provider in the resourcedetectionprocessor (#42569)
- `spanmetricsconnector`: Supports adding the `collector.instance.id` attribute to data points generated by the spanmetrics connector. (#40400)
  This feature currently in alpha stage, user should enable it by feature-gate `--feature-gates=+connector.spanmetrics.includeCollectorInstanceID`
  
- `processor/resourcedetectionprocessor`: Add support for Scaleway cloud provider in the resourcedetectionprocessor (#42664)
- `exporter/awss3exporter`: adds configuration field 's3_base_prefix' to be able to set a base path for all S3 file uploads (#42661)
- `journaldreceiver`: Enable reading from all journals, including remote ones. A new option `merge` is added to the configuration. (#39188)
- `kafkametricsreceiver`: Implement client reset for recoverable errors in Sarama calls (#41363)
  This change implements client reset functionality to address recoverable errors in Sarama calls, such as connection resets and EOF errors. When a recoverable error is encountered, the client is reset, enabling the scraper to reconnect and resume metric collection seamlessly.
  
- `tailsamplingprocessor`: Set a `tailsampling.cached_decision` attribute on traces that were sampled by the decision cache. (#42535)
- `postgresqlreceiver`: Including execution time metric for currently running queries in query samples. (#42429)
  The duration for currently running queries is calculated using the query_start time available in pg_stat_activity table.
  
- `receiver/k8scluster`: Add experimental metric for container status reason (#32457)
- `telemetrygen`: Add --allow-export-failures flag to telemetrygen to continue running when export operations fail (instead of terminating) (#42135)
- `telemetrygen`: Add exponential histogram metric type to telemetrygen (#42322)
- `countconnector`: Updates the countconnector metric timestamps to use earliest timestamp from batch as start timestamp and latest as timestamp, instead of using timestamp from metric creation time. (#40573)

### 🧰 Bug fixes 🧰

- `receiver/snowflake, receiver/sqlquery`: Fix panic on startup caused by gosnowflake `v1.16.0` (#42605)
  The solution was to downgrade the dependency version to `v1.15.0`.
  For more information, refer to the [upstream gosnowflake issue](https://github.com/snowflakedb/gosnowflake/issues/1533)
  
- `elasticsearchexporter`: Fix a bug where data stream attributes in 'none' mapping mode have invalid prefix. (#42454)
- `kafkaexporter`: Fix bug where Kafka exporter ignored `auth.tls` configuration syntax. (#42754)
- `extension/storage`: Fix 'recreate' rename file only on panic (#41802)
  * This recovers from a panic when the bbolt db is corrupted and renames the file when a panic occurs.
  * This changes the `recreate` behavior to not rename the file upon every start of the collector.
  
- `isolationforestprocessor`: This PR fixes goroutine leaks in the isolation forest processor caused by improper shutdown coordination of background `modelUpdateLoop` goroutines. (#42675)
- `servicegraphconnector`: Fix exponential histogram doesn't clean when expire (#42019)
- `awss3receiver`: Ensures default wait time is applied in SQS configuration when not explicitly set. (#42608)
- `exporter/loadbalancing`: Drop resources if the service routing key does not exist (#41550)
- `processor/redaction`: Support redaction of scope level atrributes (#42659)
- `faroexporter`: Fix success response handling in faroexporter so any HTTP 2xx status code indicates success instead of only 202 Accepted. (#42658)
- `splunkenterprisereceiver`: Fix a typo from a previous PR implementing the search artifact size metrics, which has caused errors from parsing empty strings. (#42615)
- `signalfxexporter`: Only validate the root_path of the collector if `sync_host_metadata` is enabled. (#42688)

<!-- previous-version -->


## v1.42.0/v0.136.0

### 💡 Enhancements 💡

- `xpdata`: Add Serialization and Deserialization of AnyValue (#12826)
- `debugexporter`: add support for batching (#13791)
  The default queue size is 1
- `configtls`: Add early validation for TLS server configurations to fail fast when certificates are missing instead of failing at runtime. (#13130, #13245)
- `mdatagen`: Expose stability level in generated metric documentation (#13748)
- `internal/tools`: Add support for modernize in Makefile (#13796)

### 🧰 Bug fixes 🧰

- `otelcol`: Fix a potential deadlock during collector shutdown. (#13740)
- `otlpexporter`: fix the validation of unix socket endpoints (#13826)

<!-- previous-version -->
